Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Lance Grande. He's a
distinguished service curator Emeritus at the Field Museum. And
today we're talking, we're talking about his book, The
Evolution of Religions, The History of related traditions. So,
Doctor Grande, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone. Oh, thank you to. So we're
going to talk about the evolution of religions and
how they relate to one another. So just to,
before we get into religion itself, let me just
ask you a little bit about some of the
methodology that you apply in this kind of work
and in your book specifically. So, could you start
by telling us about evolutionary systematics? What is that
exactly?
Well, i it's modern context, it's a classification of
groups of things based on historical relationships and uh
shared characteristics. Um We basically look at, you know,
characteristics that we think are uh uniquely uh derived
for groups and that's how we build these trees
that tell us something about the history of things.
And what would you say that we gain from
approaching religion or religions from an evolutionary perspective? What
kinds of insights do we get from that?
Well, it gives us a broader understanding of diversity
with uh this historical uh perspective of uh connections
and shared uh foundations. And I think that's something
that uh I is useful in any deep studies
of history.
And in, again, understanding a little bit how you
approach things in your book at a certain point,
you say that you examine the evolutionary history of
major groups of religions in an agnostic context. So
what is that agnostic context? What does that mean
in this case?
Uh Diagnostic, I simply mean, as a historian, uh
such an approach is necessary for an unbiased comparison
among so many thousands of different uh things out
there. Um um RELIGIOUS ideologies in this case.
Uh So I, I mean, do you think that
perhaps approaching it from either a religious or an
atheist perspective would bias the approach here?
Yes, because then you're going into it thinking you
already know the answer and if you go into
something already knowing the answer, it becomes less scientific
in its core.
And of course, we're talking about religion, most people
perhaps think that they know more or less what
religion is about. But what actually is religion? What
is religion? What, what counts as a religion?
Yeah. It's a tricky concept because um it's defined
so differently by so many different people. I mean,
that's one way that social sciences differ from the
biological sciences and that in the biological sciences, there
are rules for naming groups and, and understanding what
a group means. Um Those things don't exist in
the social sciences so much. So people use names
and they mean all kinds of different things. Um
ESPECIALLY with something like religion. Um So the most
critical thing for me was to clearly define how
I was using it because that's the only way
that uh then it can make any long term
sense to, to other people studying the same subject.
So I usually, um I try to remain as
unbiased as possible. So I, I define a religion
in its most broad sense as a supernatural belief
system. Um And then within that, I identify a
subgroup called organized religion, um which I identify as
a formally codified and institutionalized religions. Um THAT I
start, I go from there and then start to
look for the subgroups of these things.
Mhm. But uh of course, I think we're going
to get back into the topic of organized religion.
But since you mentioned it now, and you say
that it's basically about institutionalized religion. I mean, what
does institutionalized religion mean? I mean, where at, at
what point do you say that the religion in
a particular society is institutionalized?
Well, these are generally belief systems that have laws
and traditions and uh specific organizational structures and revered
figures and enough of, and a number of other
things that, that we can compare and look for
similarities and differences and in the way we classify
the thousands of different belief systems out there.
And is there any particular reason? I mean, was
it just out of your own personal interest or
is there any other particular scientific reason, let's say
for you to have picked religion? Because I imagine
that you could have done the same with any
other cultural phenomena or cultural phenomenon in human society.
Do, do you think that religion plays a particularly
important role in human societies or not?
I do. And I picked it also because um
there's kind of AAA revolution in the social sciences
today. Um There's a long history of um evolutionism
and even broad comparative is in the social sciences.
Um uh Shortly after Darwin published the origin of
species, some social scientists were drawn to it to
um look at culture. But early on in the
late 19th and early 20th century, uh many of
these uh workers were looking at evolution as a
ladder of progress or uh is some innate qualitative
thing. And that led to all kinds of bad
consequences, you know, ranging from eugenics to worse. And
uh as a result of that, um social science
has largely rejected not only evolutionism eventually, but even
broad comparative. And um but in the meantime, the
biological sciences completely changed the way they looked at
evolutionary studies. Um And uh rather than looking at
evolution as some sort of ladder of progress which
they no longer do. Um They started looking at
uh evolution as simply diversification over time in a
non qualitative way. So, um so that way of
looking at evolution has been slow to re-enter some
of the social sciences, uh linguists have embraced it.
And so there are a lot of uh linguists
who now use P phylogenetic evolutionary techniques, but it's
been very slow to penetrate other areas like history
of religion studies. So, I mean, I've always liked
to challenge. So I picked um history of religion
studies and uh and this is where I landed.
Mhm But do you think that nowadays, particularly in
the humanities and when you try to approach religion
through a perspective coming from the humanities that there's
more acceptance of using or applying evolutionary theory or
not,
that remains to be seen uh uh a again
in um many um aspects of the social sciences
like history, religion studies. There is still resistance not
only to any kind of evolutionary approach, but even
broad comparative is, I mean, there's a, a uh
school uh of uh the social sciences sometimes called
particulars which basically says stay in your own lane
and don't uh don't go outside of that. But
as somebody interested in, in the broadest and deepest
history, I'm drawn to things that are much broader
in their look at um uh diversity. And um
that, so that's part of what drew me in
here and um it's been interesting to see the
reaction to it uh both positive and negative
and why do you think that religions are so
common across human societies? And since we're also talking
here from an evolutionary perspective, do you think that
we have evolved to being predisposed to religiosity in
any way that it is something innate in human
beings? Or is it, for example, a by-product of
other adapt of other psychological adaptations we might have
evolved? I mean, do you have any uh any
particular position when it comes to that kind of
question, if religion is something that we are predisposed
to in naturally predisposed to and if it's the
result of natural selection,
well, there are many ideas about that um as
you might guess, um they, they range from, um
just say uh some sort of ambiguous uh um
um noting of these, the, the uh broad diversity
of religion to uh some scientists even claiming there's
a genetic component to it, which of course is
hotly debated. Um It is, it does seem to
be ingrained. I mean, according to a 2010 study
by the Pew Research Center, only about 2% of
people are uh strict atheists and another 10% are
agnostics, um the rest appear to follow one particular
branch of religion or another today. But that's,
let me just ask you those 2% that are
strictly at the atheists uh is what does that
2% correspond to, are we talking about the entire
global population or everyone that ever existed? What are
we referring to there?
We're referring to a, a single study by the
Pew Research Center uh uh in 2010 uh on
the population of the uh early 21st century on
the planet. So that it's a specific point in
time and of course, they weren't able to survey
uh 7.5 billion people. Uh But it's a representative
sample that it was a quite, quite a large
sample involving um countries acro across the globe.
Yes, because I was wondering if uh today in
the 20 twenties, it would still be only 2%
of people who identify as atheists in the world.
You know, nobody knows. I mean, the, the pew
uh uh survey was the last one of its
size. So, I it's, I'm sure they will do
and try and repeat that at some point in
time, but it was an enormous project. So, so,
um but, you know, 2010 is fairly um recent.
So, uh um it's good to um at least
have something that you can look at.
Do we have any idea if there ever was
any human society which lack religion altogether where no
religion, which didn't have any sort of religion at
all?
Well, again, that depends on how you define religion
and, and in the most general way that I
define it uh, supernatural belief systems. Um, ALTHOUGH there's
no way of proving it, I suspect that it
went back, uh, close to the, uh, uh, it,
it, it went back probably at least, uh, 100,000
years or more because, I mean, the early, um,
forms of supernaturalism would have been more animistic, uh,
maybe in terms of, uh, um, um, being awed
by the natural, um, phenomena, um, you know, the
wind, the, the storms, the sun and the moon.
Um But also by um say, um the value
of uh maternal uh things that, you know, I
mean, basically early clans, they were dependent on um
mothers producing Children or they disappeared. And, and so
there, there are probably some reverence attached to that
and, um that is sometimes thought to be demonstrated
by the, the abundance of these Venus figurines that
we find in, in the, the archaeological record going
back 40,000 years or so. Um But, you know,
like all things that go back so far in
history, we can only speculate uh about the uh
most distant reaches of uh human culture.
And since we're also going to talk here today
about uh how some of the, at least the
main or biggest religions relate to one another. Do
we have any idea at all or is it
possible for us to know how many religions would
have existed in human history?
You know, I am, I estimate there must be
at least 10,000 branches of religion today and many
times that amount that have gone extinct over time.
Um, BUT this is a conservative generalization. Um, SOME
people have proposed that every individual has its own
particular religion because every individual has a slightly different
way of looking at these things. Sometimes they combine
the ideas of one religion with another religion or
certain aspects of it, or sometimes they'll ignore one,
element of a, an organized religion. I mean, there's
so many different ways that, um you could, you
could almost make the case that every individual has
its own distinct religion. But again, that's not so
different from the uh case in biology where you
could say, well, every organism has its own genotype.
Yeah, that doesn't stop us from then identifying specific
groups of comparison like species, which it can tune,
can, can contain a lot of uh genotypic variants.
But we, uh we, um we form these specific
groups based on all these specific shared characteristics and
that gives us a group that we can compare,
compare to another group. We do much the same
with religions because we can identify these traditional groups
uh um that at least the way they were
founded and uh recognize that, well, everything continues to
diversify and even those traditional groups go on to
branch into many different uh subgroups.
And because there are these relationships between religions as
we're going to talk about. In the second, the
relationships between some of them, is it easy to
strictly separate one religion from another? Like, I don't
know why is, is it possible at all to
say? Ok. So here we have Judaism and uh
uh uh from this point onward, it's already Christianity
or something like that. I mean, is it possible
to make that separation precisely or not?
Well, every uh definition of groups and every um
um pattern of relationship we find is only a
hypothesis. I mean, that's how science works. We make
hypotheses and then these aren't meant to be final
word. I mean, that's one of the things that
separates um science from fundamentalist religion that is every
hypothesis we create is meant to be tested by
future workers. Uh And uh um if uh the
ideas there are superseded by greater evidence, they're meant
to be modified and adjusted over time. And um
science is a continually um uh refined process that,
that continues to test itself and, and make um
uh changes and hopefully improvements to what it proposes.
And of course, we can represent the relationships between
the different religions in the form of an evolutionary
tree or a phylogenetic tree. Uh But uh does
that, do, do those trees represent in any way
lather of progress or universal improvements? I mean, does
it have, does it follow any sort of, let's
say ology or something like that?
Well, as we talked about before, um there was
a time when early evolutionists thought that it, there
was some sort of innate path of progress to
evolution, but that has been abandoned by evolutionists since.
Um uh And uh we no longer look at
uh evolution as a ladder of innate progress. Uh
We simply look at it as diversification over time
as groups uh respond to the particular environments that
they're in. Um SOMETIMES an environment will um select
for specific groups. But the thing to remember is
those environments are constantly changing too. So what may
be a selective advantage for a group at one
time in place um may be uh a disadvantage
in another. So, um there is no real innate,
qualitative control or ladder of progress here. It's simply
um trying to decipher uh what the diversification history
of things has been over time.
So we can say that for example, one particular
organized religion is an improvement over another different organized
religion or that organized religion even itself is better
in some way is better than supernaturalism,
right? Yeah. And scientifically would, we would never do
that. Um uh Of course, that's when we're taking
an unbiased look at things. And as we know,
uh a lot of people who are vested in
religion aren't there to take an unbiased approach, they're
there to promote a particular branch or another which
um then makes it um something other than a,
a, an unbiased uh scientific analysis of history.
And how do we decipher then the patterns of
relationship between the different religions. How, how do we
do that?
Well, we basically look for um, patterns of uh
characters. Uh Well, I should say whether it's uh
in biology or culture, that's one of the steps
we do is we look for these, these shared
characteristics, uh in particular groups that appear to be
unique to these groups and, and that we can
theorize their shared because they were all derived from
a common ancestor. Now, with culture, we have an
advantage uh over biology that biologists don't have. And
that is so much of the diversification of culture
occurred um during literate time that we have written
contemporaneous records of things like founders or ancestors and
diversification patterns. That's something that biologists would only dream
about because again, most speciation events happened millions of
years ago. So there's no way of having any
kind of, of uh historical written records of it.
Uh All we have are these character patterns which
we use to hypothesize patterns of relationships that we
then explain with our theories of uh of uh
evolution. Um But culture has this added piece of
information that is, is very valuable and, and um
gives us uh a ma sometimes a, a very
solid pattern of, of relationship. Mhm
And I would also imagine that it would be
very complicated or that, that it is in fact
very complicated to disentangle the effects that natural and
cultural selection might have had on religion or separating
what is biological from what is cultural.
Right. Yeah, it, it, it's hard to, I, I
think when we're dealing with cultural evolution, we're, we're
pretty much confined to ideologies, uh, and, uh, um,
traditions and, and, um, uh, the biological evolution um,
is a, a completely different entity than, uh, the
cultural evolution. Uh It's possible that 1 may, uh,
um influence the other in some ways but they're
really separate, uh, um, elements in a deep history,
by the way you used the word, uh, ideologies.
There, does it have a specific meaning in this
context?
Um, I, I, well, in other words, the ideology,
it's a, a, a, a, an understanding or, um,
something having to do with human, human thought rather
than, um, you know, growing an extra arm or,
or something that's physical. I mean, it's, it's, uh,
you're dealing with, um, uh, uh, a group thought
patterns, um, rather than, uh, uh, physical phenomena.
Mhm. And so evolutionarily speaking, uh, first of all,
what is, what you call in the book Supernaturalism
and then we'll compare it to organized religion. But
what is supernaturalism?
Uh, SUPERNATURALISM is just the, the belief in, um,
anything that is beyond the, the natural, that is,
um, you know, a belief in, uh, s some
sort of spiritual essence or something that is basically
beyond the physical world. Um, SO, uh, uh, it,
it eventually becomes more organized with, uh, with, uh,
organized religion. Uh, ONCE we start, um, putting structure
into that, um, you know, maybe, uh, revered figures
and, and different organizational structures and, and, um, laws
commandments. I mean, all of these things they eventually
came to more formalize, uh, different types of, uh,
religious belief.
Mhm. Uh, AND do we have a good understanding
of how we move from supernaturalism or even anthropomorphic
supernaturalism to organized religion? Are there any particular kinds
of steps that societies usually follow to get there
or not?
You know, it's, it's a real generalization. Uh uh
Again, um, it's not a ladder, it's not a
linear path. Um But it's a, it's a level
of generality more than anything else. Um So, I
mean, supernaturalism is just this belief in the supernatural.
And, uh, it, it was thought to be, you
know, an, the earliest form of, uh, of any
kind of religion because it started with sort of
a pure animistic belief, you know, uh that all
things have a spiritual essence, whether it's the wind,
the sun, the moon or, or motherhood, all of
these things were revered, um, probably by, um the
most, uh um uh some of the earliest human
cultures. And again, of course, this is all largely
speculative because we're dealing with things well, before, um,
any kind of written records or even anthropological uh
records. Anthropomorphic supernaturalism seems to be kind of a
natural um addition eventually because, uh I think eventually,
uh they have record of attributing human characteristics to
these supernatural elements. So, you know, uh this reverence
for the moon became a moon goddess, the, the
reverence for the sun, a sun God and, and
so on and so forth. They be, they became
actual entities of some sorts. And, um, you know,
eventually these, these, uh, uh beliefs became more and
more formalized as did other ma uh, other matters
of, uh, social behavior among humans.
But then when we talk about organized religion, uh
the first organized religions were polytheistic,
right? Yeah, they, they were, they appeared to be
uh uh animistic polytheism. That is, I mean, they
were, they were um certainly polytheistic, but the gods
still represented all these natural uh elements or, or
um phenomena of one sort or another. Um They
became more social with time and um and with
time, the uh pantheons of gods even developed um
uh more hierarchical structures or be, you know, um
you develop things like chief gods and, and God
and uh various uh high goddesses. Um uh AND
this eventually evolved into more um male dominated pantheons
uh because uh it kind of followed the social
structure of uh other parts of human society where
males came to dominate with armies and emperors and
all kinds of other things. So there was this
constant um um change and we can look back
historically on it and we can, we can see
historically different chapters of it even though it wasn't
a, a uh any kind of progressive thing. It
was simply the change we observed over history
and geographically. Do we have any idea where the
first organized religions develop?
You know, that's a really tough question because again,
like all things uh in deep history, the further
back you ti in time you go, the more
speculative our ideas become now, uh going back to
the earliest organized religions, uh we know that um
both that there were two massive uh um uh
groups that developed uh before 11,000 years ago. One
was it indigenous Eastern organized religions? And the other
was indigenous western organized religions which also contained part
of the northern Africa. Um Now, although that they
go back at least 11,000 years, there were probably
much older ones uh particularly from other parts of
the African continent where humans were first evolving. Um
But unfortunately, most records of the earliest indigenous African
religions, other than these Egyptian ones uh were lost
um partly because they develop so long before any
kind of literacy. Um But also because um um
Muslim conquests of the northern half of the continent
and Christian conquest of the southern half part of
the um objectives of conquest was not only to
convert but also to subvert the histories of these
other belief systems. And uh sometimes that even included
destroying uh uh records wherever they did exist. So
it's a tough question. Um And uh but like
all things in evolutionary studies uh, we can, we
only have what we have to work with. And
so we, we look at the evidence we have
and try to do the best we can with
that. It seems true in, in the biology. Of
course, uh, uh, we, the further back you go
in the fossil record, the, the less information we
have and the less these things look like modern
animals and so the less we understand them.
Mhm. I imagine that it's more or less the
same that we find when studying languages. Because for
example, we can go back up till proto Indo
European and uh establish the relationship between proto Indo
European and all the major European and Western Asian
languages. But we don't exactly know what came before
that.
Right. Exactly. And again, the, the linguists, they're the
ones that are sort of leading the, um the
pack in social sciences and bringing phylogenetics back into
the social sciences. Um Hopefully that'll, that'll spread to
uh the other areas of the social sciences with
time.
So you mentioned their Western indigenous uh organized religion
and Eastern indigenous organized religion are those the two
main original branches of organized religion.
It appears to be uh based on the information
that we currently have. But again, that's based on
an incomplete data set and it'll, it'll probably always
be changing as we, you know, we find out
more and more uh going on. Um PART of
it is that this is kind of a different
way of looking at um, these studies. And, um,
what I've done is simply set out some templates
and ideas that I'm hoping will be uh then
um modified by specialists in all these areas and
continued. And, I mean, that's how, that's how uh
it works in the biological science is that there
are generalists that work with specialists and it goes
back and forth between specialists and generalists and specialists
and generalists. But that's how we develop these finer
and finer tuned uh patterns of evolutionary diversification in
the biological world. I'm hoping that the same thing
will happen now in um these areas of the
social sciences.
But as far as we know, at least for
now, it is from these two main branches that
all the other major organized religions branch.
Again, that is uh based on the, the um
the groups that I looked at those are the
patterns that I come up with. That's not to
say that there, there aren't um other uh say
earlier groups that will be uh discovered on the
African continent, for example. Um And uh but yeah,
you know, when, when you look at these Western
groups, I mean, the western groups not only involved
uh um you know, the Mediterranean region and the
uh northern parts of Africa, but also spread to
the Americas. I mean, that's all the uh the
new world. Um EARLY new world religions came from
the West, I mean, you know, the, the um
English and the Spanish uh they all colonized and,
and basically um sent conquests into the new world
and um uh much of uh what eventually uh
came there ultimately came from. Um Well, not only
the west, but the east. Um IF we look
at the way the, the uh uh continents were
um positioned, say going back uh 11, 11,000 years,
we can see there were land connections, for example,
between Siberia and North America. As some people think
that that's how um humans first came into the
Americas was it was by these sorts of connections,
which means um early, the earliest um religions in
the Americas were maybe offshoots of Eastern organized religions.
But then, of course, uh later on, uh after
um we had the, well for a while, we
had the separation of North America from Asia when
the, we, we lost the land connection uh across
the um Arctic region there. Um uh And uh
these religions from um the East, East Asian area
uh developed independently in the Americas until um many
centuries later when seafaring opened up again, migration into
the Americas from another part of the world, the,
the West. And that's when these Western um ideas
and religions began to permeate the Americas and um
that came in, in forms of conquest. Um YOU
know, Spain and, and England and all these powers,
they um brought a powerful um a, a armies
in, uh, well, even small armies, but they came
with weapons that the Americans, the indigenous Americans didn't
have gunpowder swords, horses. Um, AND they brought a
lot of disease with them. And, and again, the
result was, um, most of the indigenous religions in
Americas at that point in time were uh either
extinguished or highly modified. And, um, I mean, the,
the, the evolution of the social evolution of the
planet is very complex and all these things had
to be taken into consideration when we're trying to
figure out the history of all of these different
uh belief systems over time.
And when you try to study our particular religions
or, or where they originated and how they evolved
over time, do you look into specific factors that
might have played a role there? Like for example,
ecological factors, economic factors, political, social, cultural factors, philosophical
factors, even though do you look at specific kinds
of factors or not?
I I consider all factors that might indicate some
historical relationship between groups. I mean, most ideologies have
uh elements that were present in earlier belief systems.
Um The first step is to look at as
many uh social characteristics as possible and then just
look for those, those similarities, similarities that appear to
be unique to certain groups. Um And uh then
we can uh hypothesize that these were due to
uh some sort of common ancestry at some point
in time. You know, we don't have to, um,
and we can look at, for example, all Abrahamic
religions and, and find some, uh, aspects that are
unique to them, whether it's, um, you know, certain
prophets or, or certain, uh, rules or structures. Um,
AND we can use that to make these groups
that have some sort of historical, uh connection, um,
that, but, you know, when we're, we're doing those
sorts of studies, we need to consider, uh, as
many, uh types of, of, um, of things as
possible. Mhm.
And, uh, I mean, those different factors would manifest
in terms of, or translate to how religion, how
particular religions spread across time and geography, but also
perhaps would translate into the particular kinds of beliefs
that develop over time in a particular religion. Is
that it?
Yeah, I mean, these ideas of, of how things
are related are all res retrospective. Of course, I
mean, we're looking at these things today and trying
to piece it all together. Um,
SO going back then to the two main brains
that you mentioned earlier and starting with the Eastern
branch, could you tell us a little, of course,
we won't have time to go through all the
different branches and ramifications here. But could you tell
us a little bit about Asian cyclist is what
is there?
Yeah, I mean, that's, that's the, basically what I,
I look at as the main uh indigenous Eastern
organized religion uh that had its early roots in
India and it can generally be characterized by, you
know, seeing time as cyclic with Samsara reincarnation, transmigration,
Yin Yang or uh other uh you know, cycles
of existence depending on which subbranch you're talking about.
Um It also includes employing, usually employing some sort
of mind body meditative practices. Um YOU know, uh
whether that's uh um yeah, yoga or what whatever.
Um IT'S an important part of uh most of
these uh branches. And um basically, they, they all
emphasize that correct ethical conduct over uh dogmatic scripture,
which uh differentiates it quite a bit from the
uh western um organized religions. And you know, that
the main branches basically of Asian cyclic system we
have are Hinduism Buddhism and uh the Tai religions.
But um of course, we have that um that
branch that uh entered the, the Americas at some
point in time and that, that connection and that
part, that part of deep history is, is somewhat
um more clouded because of uh uh its early
date. But also the way that so much of
that history was lost with um the conquest from
the West later on.
Right. So, uh and, but sticking to the East
for, for a little bit more. Uh So, hi,
Hinduism, is it among the major religion, major organized
religions that are still alive today? Is it the
oldest of them all or
not? It's certainly one of the oldest we know
of, I mean, it, um it sought to go
back, you know, at least 11,000 years or more
in India. And uh it's, it's um it's unusual
and that it has no single prophet founder or
core inspirational figure. Um And it, it follows, uh
you know, five basic tenants. Uh BASICALLY Dharma which
is a duty of maintaining order in nature. Um
Karma, which are the consequences of one actions in
this life on their future lives. Uh Some Sara,
which is the Hindu concept of rebirth um or
like reincarnation of sorts, a yoga which is sort
of the aids to meditation. And uh it's sacred
texts are called the Vedas. I mean, um Hinduism
had its, its greatest early expansion um under the
Gupta Empire uh between the 4th and 6th century
in India. Mhm
And of course, another major eastern relig organized religion
is Buddhism. What could you tell us about perhaps
its origins and its phylogenetic relationships?
Uh Buddhism evolved um from the Sramana uh movement
in India in the fifth century. BCE along with
Jainism and uh the Sur Sur I'm sorry, Surma
movement rejected the, the Vedas of Hinduism. And uh
it followed the teaching. Uh And at least Buddhism
followed the teachings of uh this Charismatic uh spiritual
founder, Gamma Buddha, otherwise known as the Buddha. Um
And the great expansion of Buddhism began with uh
Ashoka, the great ruler of the uh Mara Empire
in the third century BCE, like uh so many
major religions, they were, they were tied to, um,
um, emperors at some point in their history which
greatly expanded their influence around the globe.
And now the main places where we can find
Buddhist people is, are in the, are in Asia,
right in Eastern Asia, particularly
that. That's right. It, it kind of moved their
core from, uh, from India out, out eastward. Mhm.
And what about Taoism? I mean, where does it
come from? And how does it relate to the
other Eastern religions?
Well, uh Taoism is part of a, a more
general, um, a group I call Tao E religion.
And it's a branch of Asian cyclist is that
uh formed in China. Uh And uh it uh
formed two major groups, uh Taoism uh and Confucianism
in China and then also spread to Japan as
Shintoism. You know, most Taig branches are, are polytheistic
and they emphasize a very strong reverence for ancestors.
And so you mentioned Confucianism there, I mean, when
it comes to Confucianism and Buddhism, for example, many
times people talk about them as philosophies or religions.
I mean, does that debate matter here? Does it
matter if they are philosophies or religions?
Well, for me, if they are philosophies that are
tied to supernatural beliefs, then they, they constitute uh
religions in the most basic sense. Um But it's
true, the, the um um Tao Taoism um was
basically a philosophical type of uh uh what I
call religion. Um uh PARTLY because, uh you know,
Taoism was uh was founded by a philosopher named
Lao Zi in the um uh sixth century BCE
and emphasized uh natural order uh or as Confucianism
was also founded by a philosopher Confucius in the
sixth century BCE. Uh It differed from um uh
uh Taoism in that uh Confucius emphasized social order
rather than uh natural order. But uh basically, there
was the same overriding philosophical uh base uh that
guided it.
Mhm. So, we've, we've gone through some of the
major organized religions in the east. Now, looking at
the west and you mentioned earlier, North Africa Europe.
So let's talk a little bit about the Afro
Euro Mediterranean organized rule religions. What part of the
main dominant religion, the most dominant religions that we
have to consider here?
Well, today, uh, the most dominant religions by far
are Christianity and Islam, uh, which collectively make up
more than 60% of all religious people according to
the 2010, uh, study by Pew research.
Mhm. And, and, but then, for example, within Christian
is we now have many different kinds of branches,
right? Oh, we do for sure. Uh, um, uh,
Christianity and, uh, um, both Islam again, as I
say, they make up 60% of all religious people.
There, there are thousands of different branches. Um, EVEN
though, uh, both Christianity and Islam are, are forms
of Abrahamic religion. Who's, um, or you could say
the mother religion of Abraham is, was, um, uh,
uh, Judaism of sorts. And, um, although even, even
though today traditional Judaism makes up less than 8%
of all religious people according to the Pew study,
um, you could say it is again, the, the
mother religion of, of the others that it just
diversified over time. And, I mean, that's a p
pyogenic perspective.
Mhm. And, uh, could you tell us a little
bit about greco-roman polytheism because of course, when talking
about particularly Western civilization, many times, people refer to
Greece and Rome as the gravel of western civilization.
So how do those polytheistic religions connect to the
rest in the West?
Well, the Greco Roman civilization is, it's called that
because um the Roman civilization adopted so much of
Greek civilization as it, as it came into power.
Um Even if you look at even the gods
of, of uh the Greek pantheon, many of those
same gods were simply given new names and transformed
into the Roman pantheons over time. Um The rise
of a Greco Roman civilization was a key part
of the rise of Western civilization. And it's uh
and it's uh the religion uh permeated that, I
mean, the, the rulers of uh Greco Roman civilization,
they closely tied themselves to uh the pantheons of
polytheistic gods. They had, I mean, many emperors were
even defied as part of the pantheon. Um It
was only later in the fourth century ce that
uh the Roman Empire eventually adopted monotheism as its
state religion.
Mhm. And earlier I asked you how we went
or how we go from supernaturalism to organized religion.
But now how do we go from polytheism to
monotheism? Do we have a good understanding of that?
Well, you know, at first there was a pantheon
of many gods. Um, I mean, in fact, there
were many different pantheons, um, different regions, uh, almost
every different region of the area had its own
specific pantheons, sometimes they had different gods in charge.
Um Eventually, uh these pantheons came to recognize a
chief God. And so there would be a kind
of a God in charge. And um as uh
gods, a adopted specific rules throughout these pantheons. And
then this organizational structure was built and eventually this
uh uh developed into a chief God becoming an
only God. And um of course, once that happened,
that was the rise of monotheism. Um THIS fit
well for, for empires, you know, where there was
always a ruler looking for divine support to enhance
uh universal respect. Um uh Emperors were sometimes inducted
in the pantheons of gods, as I said. But
uh once monotheism developed emperors began to also claim
some sort of special relationship to the one and
only God. So again, the the empires and uh
early um forms of these polytheistic and early monotheistic
religions, it kind of went hand in hand. Mhm
Yes. And it's very interesting because uh you mentioned
there that in polytheistic religions, we tend to have
a hierarchy among the gods. And even in Christianity,
for example, of course, there's just one single god,
but we also have lots and lots of saints.
So it's almost as if that sort of hierarchical
organization also translated into some of the monotheistic religions.
But instead of saying that the other divine entities
are also gods or minor gods, we call them
saints in Christianity, for example.
Right. Yeah, a large part of it is just
a change in terminology. But you're right. Um The
differences between the pantheons of, of say sub gods
is not that different from uh the uh the
group of saints. I mean, I remember I went
to a parochial school growing up and, and I
remember the nuns telling us, well, you know, if
you lose something, you pray to this saint or
if you want uh something else to happen, you
pray to that saint. I mean, uh at some
point, the similarities are extremely um close there. And
um it's uh it's interesting um the uh in
fact, the early conquest of the Americas, uh often
some of the strategies were when um the uh
the Catholic church would come into an area and
try and convert the masses. They could, they would
go to a place of worship that had uh
different statues of different gods and sometimes simply uh
rename or use those same statues to represent different
saints um that had the advantage of making people
more comfortable with this change that was being forced
upon them. So, um, yeah, it's a, it's a,
it's an interesting sort of, um, uh, historical uh
progression that we see and I don't mean progression
in terms of progress. I mean, just it's the
way that it happened
in terms of change. Right.
It change.
So, and what do we know about what might
have been the earliest, uh religious manifestations of monotheism?
Well, you know, of course, we're dependent on archaeological
information for that. So we can only speculate but
some of the things, the information that we do
have. Uh I was, for example, uh in the
14th century BCE of Egypt, um uh Pharaoh Akan
Nain declared the chief God atten um in the
pantheon there to be the only God at some
point. Um And this was what's sometimes called Atin
is, and um so for a brief period, uh
we had this monotheism there which the Pharaoh and
his wife claimed a special relationship to uh and
being the intermediaries to which gave them an added
amount of power, of course, but this was very
uh relatively short lived because once he died, um
the uh old priests of the uh older pantheon,
um I looked at him as sort of a
heretic in a way and, and brought things back
to uh the older pantheon and at is uh
basically disappeared. It wasn't until about the 12th century
BCE that we had a, another form of monotheism
rise called zoroastrianism. Um This was basically from the
Persian prophet Zor Astor who recognized the chief God
uh uh a Hera Mazda. Um This became AAA
um monotheistic um uh religion that actually still survives
today, mainly by um a group called the Parsi
in India, even though it developed originally in Persia.
Um And uh finally, the one, the most successful
of these, of course, was Abrahamic monotheism, which is
developed in the sixth century BCE. And, and uh
again, it started not as monotheism but as a
polytheistic um f belief system. But um uh at
some 0.1 of the gods uh Yahweh uh was
recognized as a chief God of the pantheon. And
eventually, there was a movement that developed called the
Yahweh Alone movement. Um And that eventually uh um
recognized Yahweh as the only God. And this is
generally represented by a number of important patriarchs such
as Abraham, Noah and Moses. And it took the
form. It first took the form of what we
think of as traditional Judaism. But then um eventually
diversified into all these other branches.
And when it comes to the three big Abrahamic
religions, Judaism, Christian is and Islamism. How do you
look at the phylogenetic relationships between them?
Well, again, I I see Judaism as a term
is commonly understood as the sort of the mother
Abrahamic root that eventually diversified into orthodox Judaism, Christianity,
Islam, and some of the lesser known extinct branches
uh such as the essences and the Ebon nights.
Um Again, diversification is a never ending process.
Uh And so let's focus perhaps a little bit
here on Islam specifically. How did it rise and
how does it relate to other religions?
Well, Islam arose in the seventh century ce um
in the Arabian Peninsula around a prophet named Muhammad.
Um And although it rose as a branch of
Abraham is uh it began as uh one that
considered Christianity in orthodox Judaism to have wandered off
the correct path and distorted the original message of
the prophets. Um Its early success was due to
its uh symbiotic relationship once again with uh um
uh ruling powers, the medieval Caliphates or the Muslim
empires.
And what is because you, you mentioned some of
the doctrinal core of, for example, when we're talking
about the Eastern religions of Hinduism Buddhism, Taoism, what
is the doctrinal core of Islam?
Uh Well, the doctrinal core of Islam is tied
to its sacred book, the Koran uh and its
belief in the, the one God Allah. Um It,
it uh Muhammad is considered the last of 25
prophets listed that begins with Adam and includes Noah
Abraham Moses and even Jesus among others. But it's
um last and ultimate prophet um was Muhammad. Um
It had a, an early history that involved uh
a lot of conflict. Um Some historians have even
called Islam, a warrior religion, but uh this is
generally a non Islamic perspective because all major Abrahamic
religions had these, um uh at times violent um
uh periods of expansion.
Yes. And sometimes I, I mean, nowadays, particularly, sometimes
we hear people claiming that he Islam, particularly, I
is very prone to having a very close relationship
between the state and the church. But that also
happened at least historically with the other major Abrahamic
religions like Christianity and Judaism.
Right? That's true.
A and I in Islam, we hear a lot,
lots of times people talking about the, the Sunni
and the Shia, what are these two different groups?
And what distinguishes them?
Well, um the Shia believe that Islam uh divine
leader must be a blood descendant of Muhammad and
the Sunnis do not. Um This is um this
has led to a lot of serious uh clashes
between the two groups over time. Um The Sunnis
are represent the majority of Muslims and, and they
uh include about 85% of all Muslims. Um It's
um it's an, it's an interesting uh um dynamic
that, that developed there and it goes all the
way back to shortly after Muhammad's death.
So let me then just ask you before we
go on to some more general questions to wrap
up the interview. Let me just, just ask you
a little bit more about Christianity because at a
particular point, there was a sort of a schism
between the East and the West in Christianity. Could
you tell us a little bit about that? I
mean, what was that schism about? How did it
start and so on?
Well, there have been a number of schisms within
Christianity, of course, but there was, uh, there's also
the, um uh uh, a schism between what became
known as the Roman Catholic church and, and uh
protestantism. I mean, basically, um, part of it was
fueled by, um, say, um what are sometimes referred
to as the bad Popes. But uh basically, there
was a, there was a, a um period in
time when uh Catholicism in Rome was raising money
by selling um indulgences that is you could give
a certain amount of money to the church and
that would uh get, get your soul out of
purgatory all the more quickly. Um I mean, there
were, there were abuses like this that were happening
at, at a larger and larger rate until finally,
um There was this split um uh between um
Protestantism and um uh what again became known as,
as Roman Catholicism. Uh But that was only one
major um uh split of many that would occur
over time uh within the uh uh the major
branches of Christianity. A again, Christianity was like all
of the other um religions and that uh there's
no way to stop the diversification over time. And
sometimes that's due to um the springing up of
just new beliefs. Sometimes it's due to people perceiving
that, that the church is being uh poorly led
by um authoritative figures. They're all different kinds of
reasons for it. But um it, it, it, it
just never stops.
And that also includes, for example, when Europeans went
to uh the Americas and elsewhere, but particularly in
the Americas, they exported uh different forms of Christianity,
Catholicism, protestantism. In the Americas, we nowadays can see
very many different uh Chris Christian denominations, right? That
are the Americas is a very complex situation because
um again, the conquest was so overwhelming that so
much of the actual indigenous belief systems were either
wiped out or modified in such a way that
they were no longer recognizable. There were many um
sort of hybrid belief systems in the Americas. Now
that you could uh you can go to certain
regions and see say forms of Christianity, the Chris
Christianity that were, were uh highly influenced by Mayan
polytheism or you know, you can find these different
um combinations, these really aren't merges uh so much
in a p phylogeny as say uh some you
could look at it as certain Mayan branches that
he developed Christian characteristics and certain Christian branches that
developed uh Mayan characteristics. I mean, ferreting the details
of that out are are gonna be very complicated
jobs for specialists in those areas going forward.
And also another thing that happened particularly with us,
the Portuguese and also the English or the British
was that uh we took uh African slaves to
the Americas. In our case, the Portuguese, it was
to Brazil mainly. And then there were, uh there's
also a sort of hybrid religions that are a
result of some elements of some of those, uh
I, I mean, smaller African religions we merged with,
with elements of Christianity and also sometimes merged also
with elements of uh the tribes that lived in
Brazil originally.
Yeah, I mean, uh uh but we, we can't
underestimate the sheer power of those conquests that they,
they just so overwhelmed uh things in the Americas
that um it, it, it is um it's, it's
interesting to speculate what would happen if it was,
in fact the new world that uh um invaded
uh the old world and had been successful in
spreading their beliefs there, how different the world would
be today? Mhm
So toward the end of the book, and now
I'm going to ask a few more general questions.
Toward the end of the book, you talk about
four historical trends in the evolution of religions and
I would like for you to explain each of
them. So the first one is all major religions
are historically interrelated at some level. Could you explain
that, please?
Yeah, I mean, that's, you know, a lot of
um of uh social sciences, um scientists in history
of religion studies don't uh look at the broad
comparison of things because again, it's this broad comparison
is still slow to permeate into some of these
studies. Um But uh one of the things that
uh seemed apparent to me is that if we
do look broadly, uh we can see that all
these um religions are historically um inter uh related,
interconnected at, at some level. Um We just have
to look at the historical uh records and the
shared characteristics. Um If we go back far enough
in time, all these ideologically connect at one level
or another, I mean, you could, you could look
at, for example, the belief in a high, just
the, the most general belief in a higher power
or some spiritual essence, that's common to almost all
organized religions. And as religions diversified over time, these
sub branches developed unique characteristics of their own, such
as like we discussed Hinduism, Taoism hard polytheism, linear
monotheism and so many others. Um It's uh it's
uh it, it's, it's a diversification that if you
look at it in reverse, it's a consolidation. Mhm
And the second major historical trend that you refer
to is the symbiotic development between religions and empires.
Could you explain that?
Yeah. Um THE most, if we look back in
history, uh we can see a correlation that the
most successful religions today were the ones that align
themselves early on with rulers of Kingdoms, empires or
Caliphates. I mean, this symbolic relationship strengthened not only
the political powers that were using the religion to
justify themselves, but also the associated religions that were
now strengthened by these political powers. And you could
see this with, say, for example, the traditional Christianity
with the Roman Empire and the fourth century ce
or with Islam and the medieval caliphates between the
7th and 8th century ce um Hinduism uh paired
up with the GTA Empire between the 4th and
6th century ce and, and became more powerful and
uh Buddhism uh with the uh Mayan Empire between
the 4th and 2nd century BCE, I mean, these
are the four major um uh religions today in
terms of size and they all teamed up at
one point in their history or another with major
uh political powers.
Another interesting thing that you point to in the
book is that the leadership role of women in
religion has generally declined through history. Could you explain
that?
Yeah, I mean, part of it seems intuitive because
uh early in human history, you know, it makes
sense, the uh the success of the clan or
tribe was totally dependent on women to propagate the
population of that group and therefore, uh motherhood uh
was um understandably worshiped. And you can see signs
of this. Um GOING back at least 40,000 years
with this abundance of uh carved um uh maternal
figures as women are um emphasizing the reproductive parts.
And uh these uh these are relatively um widespread
in, in the archaeological record. Uh We, we basically
eventually um spread that out uh into pantheons which
were a combination of male gods, but also still
included powerful mother goddesses and also, um, priestesses that
were active in, uh, organizing, uh, the worship of
these things. Um, BUT as civilizations grew in size,
um, and society, uh, males began to dominate, uh,
as soldiers, hunters and rulers and, uh, this sort
of change, uh, was also reflected in changing, um,
organized religions, uh, where males, uh came to dominate
more and more. Um, YOU know, women at first
became um um no longer leading figures, the pantheons,
um they uh eventually um in terms of uh
even um occupying clerical organizations. So you can look
today at um uh you know, where um women
have been excluded from clerical positions of authority. Um
You know, we have no female Popes or Grand
atolls, for example, I mean, and, you know, female
clerics are even rare in most religions today. Um
It was sort of a trend over time and,
uh you know, that's where we are today. Um
And you can, you can look at the status
of women also in other religions like um um
in uh Islamic society, for example, where they sometimes
have to undergo some relatively harsh conditions. I mean,
having to um you know, hide their faces in
public and um not being allowed to drive uh
various various things that, um again, I, I don't
think that uh in early Islam women, I think
had a much higher status because um um Uh,
Muhammad was dependent partly on, on, um, hi, his,
uh, his wife to actually help his position grow.
Mhm. Over time.
Right. And then the fourth and final historical trend
you point to is the impact of religions on
the evolutionary fitness of our species. Could you explain
that?
Yeah, I, I think, you know, um, a lot's
happened in human society, uh, since, uh, humans first
started to, uh, develop on this planet. I mean,
early on in human history when there are only
a couple of 100,000 humans on the planet. Um
uh The tribalistic aspect of religion, um may have
been a competitive uh uh advantage for our species.
Um, YOU know, compu communal societies that developed early
armies and educational facilities, agriculture and, and other things.
Uh um THEY, they out competed non communal populations,
but things have changed quite a bit today now
with over 8 billion people on the planet and
uh tribalism, ideological conquest, chauvinism, uh they all basically
interfere with our ability to deal with many global
challenges today.
Mhm. And so let me ask you a little
bit about the future. Then what do we know
about the future of religion? Are there any particular
trends that we are noticing in terms of people,
for example, becoming more or less religious.
You know, this is, this is one area where
I'm reluctant to even guess because there's really no
way to tell what the future of religion will
be. I mean, considering recent trends, uh I can,
the one prediction I can make is that the
diversification of ideologies will continue over time, I mean,
and what does that mean? Or I think that
means we need to becoming more pluralistic and less
tribalistic in our thinking about this type of diversity.
Uh Or we risk fueling our own eventual extinction
as a species.
So do you think that for example, people learning
about things that you write about in your book
would uh be uh it would be important. I
mean, having a better and broader historical understanding of
religions would be important for the survival of our
species.
I think so because if nothing else, it would
help us um more collectively deal with the challenges
that face us today on the planet. Um And
uh it also may um decrease the level of
uh violence that seems to be growing today with
um uh with uh um or between different societies
that are enhanced by these religious differences.
So let me ask you then just one last
question. At the beginning of our conversation, we talked
about the agnostic approach that you have in the
book. Do you think that by explaining religion and
religions in the plural and how they evolved over
time and where they come from their perhaps evolutionary
and cognitive basis that we are at the same
time explaining religion away in the sense that it
would sort of commit us to atheism or not.
No, I don't think that's true at all. Um,
YOU know, agnosticism again is not the same as
atheist atheism. I mean, agnosticism is simply an open,
less biased perspective. I mean, it's the opposite of
ideological chauvinism. I mean, in a move towards agnosticism
and broader understanding, uh, is needed today, at least
by historians because if we're really trying to understand
deep history, we can't take AAA BI a biased
approach. I mean, it's, it's fine to be guided
by positive elements of a particular faith, but there's
no way of knowing which particular sub branch is
true or false and using a particular faith to
justify intolerance and bigotry is not only unethical, it's,
it's detrimental to our future.
Mhm. Yes. I, I mean, perhaps the question I
was asking you was slightly different but, uh, what
I was trying to understand here is there are
some atheists that make the claim that if through
science, we can explain religion where it comes from,
how it evolves, then that would necessarily commit us
to atheism because we are basically explaining the religious
beliefs away in a sense. Do you agree with
that?
I don't necessarily agree with that. I mean, I
think, uh, a pluralistic attitude is not the same
as an agnostic one because even um uh forced
or mandatory athe atheism would be not unlike a
fundamentalist, um, religious belief that was forced again. Uh
We are humans that are always gonna have a
diverse set of ideologies about such basic things. Um
And I think we have to come to grips
with that and figure out how we're going to
deal with that going forward.
Great. So the book is again, the Evolution of
Religions, a history of related traditions. I'm leaving a
link with in the description of the interview and
doctor Grande. Apart from the book, would you like
to mention any places on the internet where people
can find your work?
Well, I mean, I, I suppose you could always
um uh huh go to uh um um Wikipedia,
you could find me. But I mean, basically, uh
you know, you can find, you can find books
I've done on uh University Chicago press site and
um the uh Columbia uh press site. Uh Basically
II, I would just uh welcome anybody to come
in and, and um check out the um the
evolution of religion book. Uh BECAUSE again, I'm hoping
it'll give people a much broader perspective on something
that does seem to be such an ingrained part
of uh human culture.
Yeah. And I recommend the book because uh there
you also go into much more detail when it
comes to which specific religion and their phylogenetic relationships.
So I definitely recommend the book as well. And
Doctor Grande, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a very informative conversation. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. So much Ricardo. It's been fun.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
Learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David. Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Na Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Ari
and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey
Junior, old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis
Mark Kemple. Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Noi Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Mueller, Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.